# recursive-bayesian
Bayesian estimators for biophysical systems

**Brief.** Worked on the disparities between models for tumor growth and the introduction of a new ODE-based approach for tumor and normal cell competition. Studied basic PK/PD modelling. Performed rudimentary virtual population generation and statistical analysis in Python using a modified Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. Co-developed a novel method of noise filtering tumor data using the DIRECT search algorithm. Learnt the baseline disease biology for diabetes. Developed a recursive Bayesian algorithm for joint state-parameter estimation in biophysical systems. Implemented this in a sixth-order Type 2 diabetes ODE as a proof of concept. Co-proposed a framework for residual- and innovation-based covariance updating adapted in Kalman filter-based approaches. Implemented particle filters for highly nonlinear systems.

**Reflections.** My time at Vantage has instilled in me the need for interdisciplinary thought. No field is a single, all-yielding compass of human knowledge. Our best hopes are to draw on inspiration from one another, standing on the shoulders of giants. In adopting ideas from control theory and Bayesian statistics, I've learned not only to better consider a problem from different perspectives but to also hold an oppenness to new ideas, no matter how bizarre or counterintuitive they may be. Vantage has allowed me to develop a multi-dimensional view of research. Initially hesitant about exploring biophysics, I had a lot of fun. My supervisor was a pleasure to work with -- he taught me that while I may have concrete interests, I should keep an open mind to exploring all science. I am far too young to fixate on any one area and disregard others. It is only by engaging in various fields that I can truly espouse the spirit of learning. Through him, I learned the importance of effectively articulating ideas and taking leadership in my work. Engaging in this research has fostered my interest in the intersection of computational methods and physics. It has taught me to bridge the gap between theory and application, instilling in me the philosophy of _mens et manus_. I now strongly believe that interdisciplinary study is paramount in solving problems of social value.

**Repository structure.** 
* ``diabetesDE`` is a state estimation implementation for the sixth order type 2 diabetes ODE developed by Sturis et al. [1] and appearing in Albers et al. [2].
* ``linearModels`` is a state and state parameter extended Kalman filter estimation for random walk processes. It contains files that simulate synthetic data which is called in the main EKF script.
* ``nonlinearModels`` is a state extended Kalman filter and particle filter estimation for highly nonlinear systems.
* ``unscentedKalman`` is an unscented Kalman filter state parameter estimator for the ODE defined in ``diabetesDE``. 

[1] Sturis J, Polonsky KS, Mosekilde E, Cauter EV (1991) Computer model for mechanisms underlying ultradian oscillations of insulin and glucose. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 260: E801–E809. \
[2] Albers DJ, Hripcsak G, Schmidt M (2012) Population Physiology: Leveraging Electronic Health Record Data to Understand Human Endocrine Dynamics. PLOS ONE 7(12): e48058.
